Spec: Allow the use of `source-id` in V3 (#12644)
apache/iceberg: format/spec.md

2. The width, `W`, used to truncate decimal values is applied using the scale of the decimal column to avoid additional (and potentially conflicting) parameters.
3. Strings are truncated to a valid UTF-8 string with no more than `L` code points.
4. In contrast to strings, binary values do not have an assumed encoding and are truncated to `L` bytes.

> 5. For multi-argument bucketing, the hashes are `xor`'ed: `hash(col1) ⊕ hash(col2) ⊕ ... ⊕ hash(colN)) % W`.

Reviewer: I think it would be good to be explicit about how to handle nulls and dropped columns. Should it be calculated as if `hash(null) == 0`?

It also might be worth adding parentheses for those who don't recall the precedence order between XOR and modulo.

Also - good to meet you, and thanks for working on this! I'm a developer at Snowflake working on Iceberg functionality, and we really appreciate how detailed the spec is!

Reviewer 2: Based on the fact that bucket(null) returns null, if any value is null then the entire hash value should be null? I agree that this should be explicit.

Author: ```suggestion
5. For multi-argument bucketing, the hashes are `xor`'ed: `(hash(col1) ⊕ hash(col2) ⊕ ... ⊕ hash(colN)) % W`.
```

> 5. For multi-argument bucketing, the hashes are `xor`'ed: `hash(col1) ⊕ hash(col2) ⊕ ... ⊕ hash(colN)) % W`.

Reviewer 2: Is there a specific reason to choose `xor` but not other arithmetic operations?

Author: I took inspiration from Apache Hive. I think it plays well with the hashing.

| V1       | V2       | V3       | Field            | JSON representation | Example      |
|----------|----------|----------|------------------|---------------------|--------------|

> | required | required | omitted  | **`source-id`**  | `JSON int`          | 1            |

Reviewer 3: Can't we still have a reader which reads both source-id and source-ids? Basically in our motto of reading potentially out of spec but writing in spec, we can always check if source-id is set as well as source-ids. The only time we need to break is if the two don't match.

Reviewer 3: These are implementation details but I would suggest if source-id and source-ids are both there
source-ids = list(source-id) - Fine on read, on write omit source-id
source-ids != list(source-id) - Error on read
source-id = x && source-ids == null - Fine on read, promote to list(source-id) on write
source-id = null && source-ids = list - Spec compliant config

Author: Yes, I agree that we should break if they doesn't match. We have a similar situation with `schema` and `schemas` with `current-schema-id` that might point to two different schemas. 

When we write both, we can resolve that, but I think we don't need them both?

Reviewer 3: Yeah my suggestion is that we still say in V3 that source-id is omitted but in the implementation we can still handle an out of spec metadata if we come across one. That way the spec reader code doesn't have to be version dependent.

Reviewer 2: If both `source-ids` and `source-id` are written for single-arg transform, a v3-supported reader can take a shortcut on `source-ids` and only fall back to `source-id` when `source-ids` is missing. Isn't this a desirable feature? Though someone may argue that we have to check the consistency between them like the above discussion.

Author: > That way the spec reader code doesn't have to be version dependent.

My goal was to be completely independent of the table version, also on the write side. Why not entirely remove this constraint by writing `source-id` or `source-ids` based on the number of arguments? :)

Reviewer 3: I think we can be strict on the write side ... unless we want to keep both fields indefinitely which I'm not sure is super beneficial?

Author: Ah, I see the confusion. Some examples. In the case of a single arg:
```json
{"field-id": 1000, "source-id": 1, "name": "bucket_user_id", "transform": "bucket[16]"} 
```
In the case of a multi-arg:
```json
{"field-id": 1000, "source-ids": [1, 2], "name": "bucket_user_id", "transform": "bucket[16]"} 
```
So, they are mutually exclusive, and one of them is required, indicated by the `¹`. The benefit is that we don't have to carry the `format-version` to the serializers.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I understand why we would need the format version though? Can't we always just read both as I stated above? Then we only write source-ids. That would also be version independent

Author: `source-ids` is `format-version≥3`, otherwise you need to write `source-id`'s, otherwise you might break v1 and v2 readers that are not aware of `source-ids` yet.

Reviewer 3: Ah you meant that we need the format version for the write path! Got it, I thought we were talking about the read side, let me think about that.

Author: Sorry for not being clearer! Give it some time to simmer and let us know :)

Reviewer 3: I still am not sure I like that we flip flop behavior just for the implementations sake, but it does give us some nice backwards compatibility. I think i'm in favor but It does kind of make it very easy for an engine to just avoid multi-arg transforms if they want to...

Reviewer 4: I noted this below, but I think we need to fix the issue where we have 2 required fields that may not actually be present. I think we should make `source-ids` required and always write it for v3. I think it is best to have simple and clear rules.

Then the question is how to handle `source-id`. If we are saying that `source-ids` is required and should always be used, then it doesn't make a lot of sense to me to continue writing `source-id`, but at the same time I don't really have a problem if it is still produced, but ignored. I think I would recommend:
1. First read `source-ids`
2. If it is not present, fall back to reading `source-id`
3. Always write `source-ids` in newer versions
4. If it is hard to write only `source-ids` then it is okay to also write `source-id`

I think that would make it so we don't need to worry about the conflict between the two fields. It is also fairly permissive when reading, if we want that. I think it would also be fine to validate that `source-ids` is always used for v3 tables, but it sounds like that's additional parser work.

Reviewer 5: While starting the update of core, I think `source-ids` should be required. 
The workflow would be:

1. For the reader:
1.1. We read `source-ids`
1.2. If `source-ids` is not present or null, we read `source-id` (for backward compatibility)

2. For the writer:
2.1. We write only and always `source-ids` (`source-id` doesn't exist anymore on new writer)

NB: `source-ids` is a String field as it contains a list, e.g. `1,3,5` for instqnce (`source-id` is a int field as it's a single value field).

Author: > 2.1. We write always source-ids (source-id doesn't exist anymore on new writer)

I had a similar question below. Would this also be true for `TableVersion≤2`?

> 1. For partition fields with a transform with a single argument, only `source-id` is written. In case of a multi-argument transform, only `source-ids` is written.

Initially, there was confusion around making both fields required, and this was not incorrect. They are optional based on the number of arguments, and this is fully deterministic. It would still follow @jbonofre's reader workflow, but only produce one field based on the number of arguments.

Reviewer 5: Thanks for clarifying on Slack and here. I agree with the approach.

|          |          | required¹ | **`source-ids`** | `JSON list of ints` | `[1,2]`      |
|          | required | required | **`field-id`**   | `JSON int`          | 1000         |
| required | required | required | **`name`**       | `JSON string`       | `id_bucket`  |
| required | required | required | **`transform`**  | `JSON string`       | `bucket[16]` |

Notes:

> 1. For partition fields with a transform with a single argument, the ID of the source field is set on `source-id`, and `source-ids` is omitted.

Reviewer: Would it be more consistent to always use source-ids for v3 writers? Or do you want to use source-id to allow v3 writers to be compatible with v2 readers if you don't use v3 features?

Author: This makes the serialization logic much easier, since we don't need to know about the table version. Otherwise, we would need to plumb down the table version into the [serializer](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/main/core/src/main/java/org/apache/iceberg/PartitionSpecParser.java#L101).

| V1       | V2       | V3       | Field            | JSON representation | Example     |
|----------|----------|----------|------------------|---------------------|-------------|

> | required | required | optional | **`transform`**  | `JSON string`       | `bucket[4]` |

Reviewer 4: Transform is still required, right? This looks like a typo and you meant to change `source-ids` to optional?

Author: Yes, I was one-off, thanks 🙌

> | required | required | required¹ | **`transform`**  | `JSON string`       | `bucket[4]` |

Reviewer 2: I guess the note is in the wrong place?

| required | required | required¹ | **`source-id`**  | `JSON int`          | 1           |
|          |          | required | **`source-ids`** | `JSON list of ints` | `[1,2]`     |
| required | required | required | **`direction`**  | `JSON string`       | `asc`       |
| required | required | required | **`null-order`** | `JSON string`       | `nulls-last`|

Notes:

> 1. For sort fields with a transform with a single argument, the ID of the source field is set on `source-id`, and `source-ids` is omitted.

Reviewer: Did you mean to make the `transform` row refer to this footnote? I would expect it to be the `source-id` and `source-ids` rows.

Author: This was the idea:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/16f9fe8f-dc6d-446b-8a2d-d2e03a82d1e9)

But I guess it is not obvious? I think @wgtmac raised the same question in https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/12644#discussion_r2015906621?

Reviewer 4: In other cases in the spec, we use `[1]` or similar to reference notes. I'd prefer keeping it that way. I also think it would make sense to have a "notes" column and put this in the table. That's probably easier.

Also, I don't think that this should be required. If it can be omitted, then it must be optional. With the current changes, I think this would make both of them optional and state that at least one must be present. Since that's a little strange, we may want to change it so that `source-id` is optional and `source-ids` is required. In that case, `source-ids` would always have the full set of IDs and `source-id` would only be present if there is only one source field ID.

Author: Thanks, and I agree that making both fields required is the main source of confusion here. Having `source-ids` required for V3 and not writing it for earlier versions requires us to know about the `format-version` when serializing the `partition-spec`/`sort-order` to json`.

Writing v3 metadata:

* Partition Field and Sort Field JSON:

>     * `source-ids` was added and is required in case of multi-argument transforms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * `source-ids` was added and is required in the case of multi-argument transforms.
```

>     * `source-id` should still be written in the case of single-argument transforms.

Reviewer 4: This sounds reasonable to me, except that I think `source-ids` should be required all the time.

Reviewer 5: Why not only writing `source-ids`, even for single argument (single value list) ?

Author: Just to clarify, do you mean also producing `source-ids` when `TableVersion≤2`?

Reviewer 5: No, I mean that TableVersion 3 should create both `source-id` and `source-ids` (for backward compatibility).

My initial idea was to only use `source-ids` for TableVersion 3 (even for single arg transform), but it would not work with reader from previous version.

Author: Iceberg only supports forward compatibility, so V3 readers should be able to read V2, but not the other way around. Still, requiring the table version for serializing the partition-spec does not sound ideal to me. I've changed the PR back to depend on the serialization based on the number of arguments, rather than the table version.

Reviewer 3: I thought from the other discussion we are now changing this to source-id is required for single arg transforms and source-ids is required for multi arg. So both are optional but are still "must write" language in the spec

Reviewer 4: I agree with the current changes to use both `source-id` and `source-ids` depending on whether the transform is multi-arg.

Reviewer 3: I agree, I just think this particular line makes it sound optional so I wanted to remove the word `should`

Author: @RussellSpitzer I agree, thanks for pointing out. I've updated the wording, let me know what you think!

>     * `source-ids` was added and should be written in case of a multi-argument transform.
>     * `source-id` should still be written in the case of single-argument transforms.

Author: ```suggestion
    * `source-ids` was added and must be written in the case of a multi-argument transform.
    * `source-id` must be written in the case of single-argument transforms.
```
